10 JNTRODUCTJON.

the three had been his enemy during the events that led to the
exile. Cicero now took every opportunity of shewing that he
bore no ill-will. Even in the speech in defence of Sestius,
spoken in 56, he deals only in the gentlest of reproacheS, and
assumes that the misunderstanding between himself and Caesar
was due to misrepresentations of facts made by interested
parties. In the same year Cicero pronounced his splendid
oration entitled De Provinciis Consularz'bus, a large part of
which is occupied with eulogy of Caesar's conquests in Gaul ¹.

With the conduct of Pompeius Cicero had every reason to
be dissatisfied. He had solemnly declared that not a hair of
Cicero’s head should be harmed by Clodius, and had then coolly
abandoned him. But Cicero was determined to forget this,
though Cato did his best to keep alive the recollecti0n‚ and by
violent speeches in the Senate to sow dissensions between the
orator and Pompeius. Cicero chose rather to dwell on the
services the triumvir had rendered him in securing his recall
from exile.

As regards Crassus, Cicero had no reason whatever for gra-
titude to him. That thoroughly contemptible politician was
particularly fond of coquetting with Clodius and his crew, and
had moreover in earlier years opposed Cicero at every turn.
Caesar had had great trouble to keep Pompeius and Crassus
from quarrelling ; in 56 he had met thern in Ravenna and had
arranged the misunderstanding between them. Cicero therefore,
besides furthering his own interests by attaching Crassus to
himself, could please Caesar and Pompeius by acting with him
and eulogising him as he did in his speech for Balbus. It will be
seen from what has been said that Cicero's defence of Balbus
must be regarded as a bid for the favour of the triumvirate.

c. C z'rcumstances of tlte case.

The attack on Balbus was partly directed against him
personally, and partly through him against the triumvirs, whose
trusted friend he was. The case has therefore in this respect
great resemblance with that of Archias, where Lucullus was the

1 εεςε.

